# K4BL Document Collection and Conversion Workflow, April 2023

The Bias Set (Document Collection and Control, Keyword & Abstract Creation): K4BL organizes documentary material around enslaved and free Black people humanity, stressing individuals as human actors with history, who are also changing history. The primary K4BL dataset of abstracts, keywords, and related document metadata is called the Bias Set, an Airtable spreadsheet of documents selected from the LCDDP (See Screenshot of Bias Set: Supplemental Materials). The name “Bias Set” references the transformative work of Marisa Fuentes, who calls scholars to “read along the bias grain” and confront the violence of slavery's archive as we encounter enslaved and free people of African descent referenced within it.[1] The Bias Set includes provenance metadata from the LCDDP (dates, language, citations, provenance), but we have added fields that speak to that organization principle including a) abstracts that tell the story of enslaved and free Black people in the document, b) keywords, c) names of and references to unnamed Black and Black native people in the documents. The workflow dictates the pace of Bias Set growth. At the beginning of the week, the Document Selector from each team reviews manuscript documents at LCDDP for inclusion in the Bias Set. Decisions to include a document into the Bias Set are based on topic, historical subjects mentioned by name, unnamed, or by number (i.e. enslaved people, free people of color), or historical subjects with names known to identify Black or Black-Indigenous people and/or communities (See K4BL Workflow Guidance, April 2023: Supplemental Material).[2] Our selection standards are the result of intensive and continued conversation between the Research and Editorial Teams, centering Black agency and life experiences. Documents without clear or ambiguous references to Black people are added to the “Discard Set,” allowing researchers to track which documents have been reviewed by others and which were not.[3]

From Bias Set to Transcriptions/Translations (Selection, Arrangements, Transcription, Annotations, Encoding & Metadata Creation): The Document Selector generates initial abstracts and keywords to describe the manuscript material, and downloads the matching image files from LCDDP.[4] The Document Selector chooses one document for their team to work on (and generates the Google Doc) based on a set of five criteria developed over the planning period including the urgency of telling the story in the documents, the groundbreaking nature of the individuals or events referenced, the quantity of references to Black and Black-Indigenous people in the documents, or the story’s fit with other stories already slated for the digital edition or elsewhere in the Bias Set (See K4BL Workflow Guidance, April 2023: Supplemental Materials for full descriptions of the criteria). The rest of the language team is informed which is the week’s document via Slack and documents in progress are tracked via a workflow inbox on Airtable. This document is the task for the week. Once the document for the week has been selected and the language team notified, the Transcriber reviews the Bias Set entry for errors and continues the transcription. When a draft of the transcription is ready, the Document Selector reviews the transcription for any errors, while the Translator begins work on the translation. Where needed, the Floater may enter any of these roles, assisting as necessary. When the translation is complete, the entire language team reviews the transcription and translation to confirm accuracy, a title and short abstract is drafted as a team, and the documents are sent to the Digital Team for conversion to markdown and additional metadata using VS Code. The additional metadata allows Wax Facets, the Jekyll template the site is built on, to organize stories by predetermined categories; for our purposes those categories are currently “by keyword,” “by date,” and “by name.” This organization responds to the ADE minimal guidelines for “access to the edition” to “supplement text searches” with other ways of searching beyond raw-text searching.[5] At the end of the week, the Research Team reviews progress on all transcriptions and translations, addressing questions arising and potential conversion errors. There is often overflow across weeks; the Research team may be working on as many as four or five transcriptions and translations and may add as many as four or five entries into the Bias Set per week.





[1] Fuentes, DP lives.
[2] “We will add any documents from the LCDDP Site with references to Black and Black-Native people to the bias set on Airtable, including references to people via names, numbers, nouns, descriptions, pronouns, etc. It is also possible that over the course of tracing a story there might be additional documents that fit in without discrete references. If a document has been marked as added/addable to the bias set, then it does not need further review at this stage in the workflow.” K4BL Workflow Guidance, April 2023
[3] The Research Team has discussed how to manage documents that do not have a clear reference to Black or Black-Indigenous people but offers other information relevant to Black life and history, such as geographic information about plantations or swamps used for marronage or resistance movements. We have determined for document selection purposes that references need to be clear and discrete to Black people living or dead, not conceptual. This conversation is on-going.
[4] Will switch to the Digital Editorial Assistant with implementation
[5] ADE minimal guidelines web page




